kernel: Read Only State (#2381)
tock/tock: doc/reference/trd-shared-allow-syscalls.md

Shared Allow System Call
========================================

> **TRD:** 105 <br/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**TRD:** XXX <br/>
```

**Working Group:** Kernel<br/>
**Type:** Documentary<br/>
**Status:** Draft <br/>
**Author:** Alistair Francis <br/>
**Draft-Created:** June 17, 2021<br/>
**Draft-Modified:** June 17, 2021<br/>
**Draft-Version:** 1<br/>
**Draft-Discuss:** tock-dev@googlegroups.com</br>

Abstract
-------------------------------

This document describes the shared allow system call application binary
interface (ABI) between user space processes and the Tock kernel for 32-bit
ARM Cortex-M and RISC-V RV32I platforms.

> This is an extension on the allow calls specified in TRD 105.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an extension on the allow calls specified in [TRD 104](trd104-syscalls.md).
```

1 Introduction
==============

In normal use, userspace does not access a buffer that
has been shared with the kernel with a Read-Write Allow call. This
reading restriction is because the contents of the buffer may be in an
intermediate state and so not consistent with expected data
models. Ensuring every system call driver maintains consistency in the
presence of arbitrary userspace reads is too great a programming
burden for an unintended use case.

However, there can be cases when it is necessary for userspace to be
able to read a buffer without first revoking it from the kernel with a
Read-Write Allow. These cases are situations when the cost of a
Read-Write Allow system call is an unacceptable overhead for
accessing the data.

> This allows capsules that support the shared allow call to communicate with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, capsules that support the shared allow call can communicate with
```

applications without buffers needing to be re-allowed. For example a capsule
might want to report statistics to a userspace app. It could do this by letting
the app perform a shared allow call to allocate a buffer. Then the capsule can
write statistics to the buffer and at any time the app can read the statistics
from the buffer.

2 System Call API
=================================

2.1 Shared Allow (Class ID: 7)
---------------------------------
The shared allow syscall follows the same expectations and requirements

> as described for the Read-Write syscall in section TRD104 4.4, with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as described for the Read-Write syscall in [TRD104 Section 4.4](trd104-syscalls.md#44-read-write-allow-class-id-3), with the
```

> exceptionthat apps are explicity allowed to read/write buffers that have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exception that apps are explicitly allowed to read/write buffers that have
```

been passed to the kernel.

> As simultaneous accesses to a buffer from both userspace and the kernel can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simultaneous accesses to a buffer from both userspace and the kernel can
```

cause issues if not implemented properly. For example a userspace app could

> read partially written data or the kernel could act on partially written data.

Reviewer 2: This suggests that it allows userspace to write to the buffer?

Author: That was the intent

Reviewer 2: Moved the discussion to #2803 . I thought we had agreed on a userspace-readable/kernel-writeable buffer for your use case, not arbitrary shared memory.

This would result in obscure timing bugs that are hard to detect. Due to this
each capsule using the Shared Allow mechanism MUST document, in a Draft or
Final Documentary TRD, how consistency of the data exchanged through this
shared memory region is achieved.

> 

Reviewer 2: This needs to say exactly what can be done with this system call, and can't. I.e., is it that userspace MAY read the contents of a buffer shared, but MUST NOT read to it?

Examples for mechanisms to ensure consistent data reads/writes can be driver state
machines, precisely specifying when writes will be issued to the buffer by the

> kernel, or monotonically increasing counters along the data for userspace to ensure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
kernel, or monotonically increasing counters along with the data for userspace to ensure
```

a read operation yielded consistent data.

> For an example of a monotomic counter implementation look at the

Reviewer 2: This document should walk through the examples and how to write them.

`doc/syscalls/10001_ros.md` description.

> 3 libtock-c Userspace Library Methods

Reviewer 2: Specify the allowed arguments and return types. This should be a full specification of the system call.

=====================================

3.1 Shared Allow
---------------------------------

The read-write allow system call has this function prototype:

```c
typedef struct {
  bool success;
  void* ptr;
  size_t size;
  tock_error_t error;
} allow_shared_return_t;

> allow_shared_return_t allow_shared(uint32_t driver, uint32_t allow, void* ptr, size_t size);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
read_write_allow_return_t read_write_allow(uint32_t driver, uint32_t allow, void* ptr, size_t size);
```

?

It seems odd to me for the syscall and the interface to the syscall to use different names. That might invite confusion. I'm reasonably sure that our syscalls and interfaces use consistent names elsewhere.

Author: Fixed!

```

The `success` field indicates whether the call succeeded.
If it failed, the error code is stored in `error`. If it succeeded,
the value in `error` is undefined. `ptr` and `size` contain the pointer

> and size of the passed buffer.

Reviewer: This should also explain what the `allow` parameter is [even if it's just a duplication of some of the 104 §4.4 text, locality of reference is valuable here]
